patterns/ruby/rails/hotwire/async-controller-initialization-race.md, before:

---
id: "pattern-ruby-rails-hotwire-async-controller-initialization-race"
title: "Event Race Condition When Portal Renders Async in Stimulus"
type: troubleshooting
status: draft
confidence: high
revision: 1
languages:
  - language: ruby
    versions: ">=3.0"
  - language: javascript
    versions: ">=ES2015"
frameworks:
  - name: rails
    versions: ">=7.0 <9.0"
  - name: hotwire
    versions: ">=1.0"
  - name: stimulus
    versions: ">=3.0"
dependencies: []
domain: hotwire
tags:
  - stimulus
  - async
  - race-condition
  - initialization
  - events
  - portals
introduced: 2026-01-12
last_verified: 2026-01-12
review_by: 2026-04-12
sanitized: true
related:
  - pattern-ruby-rails-hotwire-portal-state-detection-stimulus
---

# Event Race Condition When Portal Renders Async in Stimulus

## Context

In Stimulus applications, when one controller dispatches events that another controller must listen for, a race condition occurs if the listening controller initializes asynchronously (e.g., portal rendering, lazy loading, dynamic imports).

**This pattern applies when:**
- Controller A dispatches custom events (e.g., `drawer:open`)
- Controller B listens for those events
- Controller B initializes asynchronously (portal rendering, lazy load, dynamic import)
- Event fires before listener is attached → event lost

**Preconditions:**
- Multiple Stimulus controllers communicating via custom DOM events
- At least one controller has async initialization (portal rendering most common)
- Event dispatch happens immediately after user action
- No guarantee of initialization order

## Symptoms

**Observable Behavior:**

1. **Button click does nothing (no error thrown):**
```javascript
// User clicks "Open Drawer" button
// Button controller dispatches drawer:open event
// But drawer controller hasn't finished initializing
// Event fires → no listener → nothing happens
```

2. **Feature works inconsistently:**
- Works on second click (controller now initialized)
- Works if you wait a moment before clicking
- Works in tests (timing different from real browser)
- Fails on first interaction after page load

3. **Console shows event dispatched but not received:**
```javascript
// Dispatching controller
console.log('Dispatching drawer:open'); // Logged

// Listening controller
this.element.addEventListener('drawer:open', ...); // Never attached yet
```

**Real-world symptom:**
User clicks "View Details" button. Drawer opens (portal animation works) but content doesn't load. Second click works fine.

## Root Cause

**Technical Explanation:**

Portal rendering (and other async component initialization) is **asynchronous**, but event dispatch is **synchronous**. This creates a race condition:

```javascript
// Timeline of what happens:

// T=0ms: Page loads
// T=10ms: Button controller connects (synchronous)
// T=20ms: User clicks button
// T=20ms: Button dispatches 'drawer:open' event (synchronous)
// T=30ms: Portal starts rendering drawer (async)
// T=50ms: Drawer controller connects (async - TOO LATE!)
// T=50ms: Drawer controller adds event listener (event already fired at T=20ms)
```

**The race:**
1. Button controller connects immediately (synchronous Stimulus lifecycle)
2. Button dispatches event on click (synchronous event dispatch)
3. Drawer starts rendering in portal (async - React/browser scheduling)
4. Drawer controller connects AFTER event already fired
5. Event listener never receives the event (event doesn't wait)

**Why no error:**
DOM event dispatch is silent if no listeners exist. No error thrown, no warning logged.

**Why it works on second click:**
By the time user clicks again, drawer controller has connected and listener is attached.

## Fix

### Solution: Synchronous Flag + Async Event + Fallback Timeout

Use three synchronization mechanisms to cover all timing scenarios:

**Pattern:**

```javascript
// Drawer Controller (initializing controller)
export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    // 1. Synchronous flag (for immediate checks)
    window.__drawerReady = true;
    
    // 2. Async event (for event listeners)
    this.dispatch('ready', { detail: { controller: 'drawer' } });
    
    console.log('Drawer controller ready');
  }
}

// Button Controller (waiting controller)
export default class extends Controller {
  async open() {
    // Wait for drawer to be ready using three paths
    await Promise.race([
      // Path 1: Immediate return if flag already set
      ...(window.__drawerReady ? [Promise.resolve()] : []),
      
      // Path 2: Wait for async event
      new Promise(resolve => 
        window.addEventListener('drawer:ready', resolve, { once: true })
      ),
      
      // Path 3: Timeout fallback (graceful degradation)
      new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(resolve, 500))
    ]);
    
    // Now safe to open drawer (controller guaranteed to be initialized)
    this.openDrawer();
  }
}
```

### Step-by-Step Implementation

**Step 1: Identify async initialization points**

Look for:
- Portal-rendered components (Shadcn Sheet, Dialog, Modal)
- Lazy-loaded controllers (`import()`)
- Dynamically inserted DOM (`insertAdjacentHTML`, Turbo Stream)
- Controllers that load data on connect

**Step 2: Add synchronous ready flag in initializing controller**

```javascript
// Controller that initializes async (drawer, modal, etc.)
export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    // Set flag immediately (synchronous)
    window.__myControllerReady = true;
    
    // Your existing initialization
    this.loadContent();
  }
}
```

**Step 3: Dispatch async ready event**

```javascript
export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    window.__myControllerReady = true;
    
    // Dispatch event for async listeners
    this.dispatch('ready');
  }
}
```

**Step 4: Wait for ready in dependent controller**

```javascript
// Controller that depends on async controller
export default class extends Controller {
  async triggerAction() {
    // Wait for ready using race pattern
    await Promise.race([
      // Immediate if flag set
      ...(window.__myControllerReady ? [Promise.resolve()] : []),
      // Wait for event
      new Promise(r => window.addEventListener('my-controller:ready', r, { once: true })),
      // Timeout fallback
      new Promise(r => setTimeout(r, 500))
    ]);
    
    // Now safe to proceed
    this.dispatchEvent('action');
  }
}
```

### Alternative: Registration Pattern

For multiple dependencies, use a registration system:

```javascript
// app/javascript/controllers/registry.js
class ControllerRegistry {
  constructor() {
    this.ready = new Set();
  }

  register(name) {
    this.ready.add(name);
    window.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent(`controller:${name}:ready`));
  }

  async waitFor(name, timeout = 500) {
    if (this.ready.has(name)) return;
    
    await Promise.race([
      new Promise(r => window.addEventListener(`controller:${name}:ready`, r, { once: true })),
      new Promise(r => setTimeout(r, timeout))
    ]);
  }
}

export const registry = new ControllerRegistry();

// In controllers
import { registry } from './registry'

export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    registry.register('drawer');
  }
}

// Dependent controller
async open() {
  await registry.waitFor('drawer');
  this.dispatchEvent('drawer:open');
}
```

## Verification Checklist

- [ ] **First click works (not just second click)**
  - Reload page
  - Immediately click button
  - Feature should work without delay

- [ ] **All three sync paths tested**
  ```javascript
  // Test 1: Synchronous path (flag already set)
  window.__drawerReady = true;
  await open(); // Should return immediately
  
  // Test 2: Event path
  delete window.__drawerReady;
  setTimeout(() => window.dispatchEvent(new Event('drawer:ready')), 100);
  await open(); // Should wait for event
  
  // Test 3: Timeout path
  delete window.__drawerReady;
  // Don't dispatch event
  await open(); // Should timeout after 500ms
  ```

- [ ] **No console errors or warnings**

- [ ] **Works in slow network conditions**
  - Throttle CPU in DevTools (6x slowdown)
  - Test first interaction still works

- [ ] **Timeout value is appropriate**
  - 500ms is reasonable for most cases
  - Adjust if controller initialization is slower

## Tradeoffs

**Pros:**
- ✅ Eliminates race condition completely (all timing scenarios covered)
- ✅ Graceful degradation (timeout ensures feature works even if signals fail)
- ✅ Works with any async initialization (portals, lazy load, dynamic DOM)
- ✅ Minimal code complexity (one helper method)

**Cons:**
- ❌ Three synchronization mechanisms (conceptually complex)
- ❌ Global window scope pollution (`window.__*Ready` flags)
- ❌ 500ms timeout feels arbitrary (but necessary for fallback)
- ❌ Timeout adds latency in worst case (user waits up to 500ms)
- ❌ Doesn't work across browser contexts (iframes, popups)

**When to use this pattern:**
- Portal rendering causes async initialization (always)
- Event communication between controllers (common in Stimulus)
- First-click reliability is critical (UX requirement)
- 500ms timeout is acceptable latency

**When NOT to use:**
- Initialization is synchronous (no race condition)
- Controllers don't communicate via events (use outlets instead)
- Timeout latency is unacceptable (need different architecture)
- Cross-context communication needed (use postMessage)

## Related Patterns

- `pattern-ruby-rails-hotwire-portal-state-detection-stimulus` - Portal rendering breaks DOM assumptions
- `pattern-javascript-stimulus-outlets` - Alternative to events for controller communication

## References

- [Stimulus Controllers](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/controllers)
- [Stimulus Lifecycle Callbacks](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/lifecycle-callbacks)
- [MDN: Promise.race()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/race)
- [MDN: CustomEvent](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/CustomEvent)

## Notes

**Why three mechanisms?**
- **Synchronous flag:** Handles case where controller already initialized (most common after first interaction)
- **Async event:** Handles case where controller initializing during wait (proper async pattern)
- **Timeout fallback:** Handles case where both fail (graceful degradation, prevents infinite hang)

**Performance impact:**
Minimal. `Promise.race()` is fast, and synchronous path returns immediately in common case (after first interaction).

**Testing implications:**
System tests may not catch this because test timing is different from real browser:
```ruby
# Tests pass but feature breaks in production
test "drawer opens on click" do
  click_button "Open Drawer"
  assert_selector "[data-state='open']" # Passes (test timing lucky)
end
```

Add explicit initialization verification:
```ruby
test "drawer opens on first click without wait" do
  visit page_path
  # Immediately click (no wait)
  click_button "Open Drawer"
  assert_selector "[data-state='open']", wait: 1
end
```

**Architecture smell:**
If you have many async controller dependencies, consider:
- Fewer controllers (consolidate responsibility)
- Outlets instead of events (Stimulus built-in communication)
- Server-driven state (let Turbo Streams handle updates)

Commit message:

patterns(draft): add testing/capybara-visible-all + update hotwire portal patterns
- Added: troubleshooting/capybara-visible-all-for-opacity-hidden-actions
  - Domain: testing
  - Framework: rails/>=7.0, capybara/>=3.0
  - Confidence: high
  - Review by: 2026-04-13

- Updated: portal-state-detection-stimulus (rev 2)
  - Added architectural alternative: avoid portals via inline rendering

- Updated: async-controller-initialization-race (rev 2)
  - Added architectural fix: eliminate async boundary entirely

patterns/ruby/rails/hotwire/async-controller-initialization-race.md, after:

---
id: "pattern-ruby-rails-hotwire-async-controller-initialization-race"
title: "Event Race Condition When Portal Renders Async in Stimulus"
type: troubleshooting
status: draft
confidence: high
revision: 2
languages:
  - language: ruby
    versions: ">=3.0"
  - language: javascript
    versions: ">=ES2015"
frameworks:
  - name: rails
    versions: ">=7.0 <9.0"
  - name: hotwire
    versions: ">=1.0"
  - name: stimulus
    versions: ">=3.0"
dependencies: []
domain: hotwire
tags:
  - stimulus
  - async
  - race-condition
  - initialization
  - events
  - portals
introduced: 2026-01-12
last_verified: 2026-01-13
review_by: 2026-04-12
sanitized: true
related:
  - pattern-ruby-rails-hotwire-portal-state-detection-stimulus
---

# Event Race Condition When Portal Renders Async in Stimulus

## Context

In Stimulus applications, when one controller dispatches events that another controller must listen for, a race condition occurs if the listening controller initializes asynchronously (e.g., portal rendering, lazy loading, dynamic imports).

**This pattern applies when:**
- Controller A dispatches custom events (e.g., `drawer:open`)
- Controller B listens for those events
- Controller B initializes asynchronously (portal rendering, lazy load, dynamic import)
- Event fires before listener is attached → event lost

**Preconditions:**
- Multiple Stimulus controllers communicating via custom DOM events
- At least one controller has async initialization (portal rendering most common)
- Event dispatch happens immediately after user action
- No guarantee of initialization order

## Symptoms

**Observable Behavior:**

1. **Button click does nothing (no error thrown):**
```javascript
// User clicks "Open Drawer" button
// Button controller dispatches drawer:open event
// But drawer controller hasn't finished initializing
// Event fires → no listener → nothing happens
```

2. **Feature works inconsistently:**
- Works on second click (controller now initialized)
- Works if you wait a moment before clicking
- Works in tests (timing different from real browser)
- Fails on first interaction after page load

3. **Console shows event dispatched but not received:**
```javascript
// Dispatching controller
console.log('Dispatching drawer:open'); // Logged

// Listening controller
this.element.addEventListener('drawer:open', ...); // Never attached yet
```

**Real-world symptom:**
User clicks "View Details" button. Drawer opens (portal animation works) but content doesn't load. Second click works fine.

## Root Cause

**Technical Explanation:**

Portal rendering (and other async component initialization) is **asynchronous**, but event dispatch is **synchronous**. This creates a race condition:

```javascript
// Timeline of what happens:

// T=0ms: Page loads
// T=10ms: Button controller connects (synchronous)
// T=20ms: User clicks button
// T=20ms: Button dispatches 'drawer:open' event (synchronous)
// T=30ms: Portal starts rendering drawer (async)
// T=50ms: Drawer controller connects (async - TOO LATE!)
// T=50ms: Drawer controller adds event listener (event already fired at T=20ms)
```

**The race:**
1. Button controller connects immediately (synchronous Stimulus lifecycle)
2. Button dispatches event on click (synchronous event dispatch)
3. Drawer starts rendering in portal (async - React/browser scheduling)
4. Drawer controller connects AFTER event already fired
5. Event listener never receives the event (event doesn't wait)

**Why no error:**
DOM event dispatch is silent if no listeners exist. No error thrown, no warning logged.

**Why it works on second click:**
By the time user clicks again, drawer controller has connected and listener is attached.

## Fix

### Solution: Synchronous Flag + Async Event + Fallback Timeout

Use three synchronization mechanisms to cover all timing scenarios:

**Pattern:**

### Architectural Fix (Often Best): Remove the Async Initialization Point

The `__*Ready` + `*:ready` event + timeout pattern is a good mitigation when you *must* keep an async initialization boundary (most commonly: portal-based UI). However, if you control the UI architecture, the most reliable fix is to eliminate the race condition entirely.

**Approach:** Render the “listening” controller synchronously in the initial DOM (inline, non-portal). For example, instead of rendering a drawer/sheet via a portal, render an inline “details pane” that is always present but toggled with local state (e.g., `.hidden`).

**Why this works:**
- The listener controller connects during normal page load, before the first interaction.
- There is no dependency on portal timing, animation scheduling, or delayed DOM insertion.
- You can often remove `window.__*Ready` flags and timeout fallbacks because the listener is always present.

**Rule of thumb:**
- If the UI element is always in the DOM (just hidden), you generally do **not** need readiness flags.
- If the UI element is injected later (portal, lazy load, Turbo Stream insertion), keep the readiness pattern.

```javascript
// Drawer Controller (initializing controller)
export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    // 1. Synchronous flag (for immediate checks)
    window.__drawerReady = true;
    
    // 2. Async event (for event listeners)
    this.dispatch('ready', { detail: { controller: 'drawer' } });
    
    console.log('Drawer controller ready');
  }
}

// Button Controller (waiting controller)
export default class extends Controller {
  async open() {
    // Wait for drawer to be ready using three paths
    await Promise.race([
      // Path 1: Immediate return if flag already set
      ...(window.__drawerReady ? [Promise.resolve()] : []),
      
      // Path 2: Wait for async event
      new Promise(resolve => 
        window.addEventListener('drawer:ready', resolve, { once: true })
      ),
      
      // Path 3: Timeout fallback (graceful degradation)
      new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(resolve, 500))
    ]);
    
    // Now safe to open drawer (controller guaranteed to be initialized)
    this.openDrawer();
  }
}
```

### Step-by-Step Implementation

**Step 1: Identify async initialization points**

Look for:
- Portal-rendered components (Shadcn Sheet, Dialog, Modal)
- Lazy-loaded controllers (`import()`)
- Dynamically inserted DOM (`insertAdjacentHTML`, Turbo Stream)
- Controllers that load data on connect

**Step 2: Add synchronous ready flag in initializing controller**

```javascript
// Controller that initializes async (drawer, modal, etc.)
export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    // Set flag immediately (synchronous)
    window.__myControllerReady = true;
    
    // Your existing initialization
    this.loadContent();
  }
}
```

**Step 3: Dispatch async ready event**

```javascript
export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    window.__myControllerReady = true;
    
    // Dispatch event for async listeners
    this.dispatch('ready');
  }
}
```

**Step 4: Wait for ready in dependent controller**

```javascript
// Controller that depends on async controller
export default class extends Controller {
  async triggerAction() {
    // Wait for ready using race pattern
    await Promise.race([
      // Immediate if flag set
      ...(window.__myControllerReady ? [Promise.resolve()] : []),
      // Wait for event
      new Promise(r => window.addEventListener('my-controller:ready', r, { once: true })),
      // Timeout fallback
      new Promise(r => setTimeout(r, 500))
    ]);
    
    // Now safe to proceed
    this.dispatchEvent('action');
  }
}
```

### Alternative: Registration Pattern

For multiple dependencies, use a registration system:

```javascript
// app/javascript/controllers/registry.js
class ControllerRegistry {
  constructor() {
    this.ready = new Set();
  }

  register(name) {
    this.ready.add(name);
    window.dispatchEvent(new CustomEvent(`controller:${name}:ready`));
  }

  async waitFor(name, timeout = 500) {
    if (this.ready.has(name)) return;
    
    await Promise.race([
      new Promise(r => window.addEventListener(`controller:${name}:ready`, r, { once: true })),
      new Promise(r => setTimeout(r, timeout))
    ]);
  }
}

export const registry = new ControllerRegistry();

// In controllers
import { registry } from './registry'

export default class extends Controller {
  connect() {
    registry.register('drawer');
  }
}

// Dependent controller
async open() {
  await registry.waitFor('drawer');
  this.dispatchEvent('drawer:open');
}
```

## Verification Checklist

- [ ] **First click works (not just second click)**
  - Reload page
  - Immediately click button
  - Feature should work without delay

- [ ] **All three sync paths tested**
  ```javascript
  // Test 1: Synchronous path (flag already set)
  window.__drawerReady = true;
  await open(); // Should return immediately
  
  // Test 2: Event path
  delete window.__drawerReady;
  setTimeout(() => window.dispatchEvent(new Event('drawer:ready')), 100);
  await open(); // Should wait for event
  
  // Test 3: Timeout path
  delete window.__drawerReady;
  // Don't dispatch event
  await open(); // Should timeout after 500ms
  ```

- [ ] **No console errors or warnings**

- [ ] **Works in slow network conditions**
  - Throttle CPU in DevTools (6x slowdown)
  - Test first interaction still works

- [ ] **Timeout value is appropriate**
  - 500ms is reasonable for most cases
  - Adjust if controller initialization is slower

## Tradeoffs

**Pros:**
- ✅ Eliminates race condition completely (all timing scenarios covered)
- ✅ Graceful degradation (timeout ensures feature works even if signals fail)
- ✅ Works with any async initialization (portals, lazy load, dynamic DOM)
- ✅ Minimal code complexity (one helper method)

**Cons:**
- ❌ Three synchronization mechanisms (conceptually complex)
- ❌ Global window scope pollution (`window.__*Ready` flags)
- ❌ 500ms timeout feels arbitrary (but necessary for fallback)
- ❌ Timeout adds latency in worst case (user waits up to 500ms)
- ❌ Doesn't work across browser contexts (iframes, popups)

**When to use this pattern:**
- Portal rendering causes async initialization (always)
- Event communication between controllers (common in Stimulus)
- First-click reliability is critical (UX requirement)
- 500ms timeout is acceptable latency

**When NOT to use:**
- Initialization is synchronous (no race condition)
- Controllers don't communicate via events (use outlets instead)
- Timeout latency is unacceptable (need different architecture)
- Cross-context communication needed (use postMessage)

## Related Patterns

- `pattern-ruby-rails-hotwire-portal-state-detection-stimulus` - Portal rendering breaks DOM assumptions
- `pattern-javascript-stimulus-outlets` - Alternative to events for controller communication

## References

- [Stimulus Controllers](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/controllers)
- [Stimulus Lifecycle Callbacks](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/reference/lifecycle-callbacks)
- [MDN: Promise.race()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/race)
- [MDN: CustomEvent](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/CustomEvent)

## Notes

**Why three mechanisms?**
- **Synchronous flag:** Handles case where controller already initialized (most common after first interaction)
- **Async event:** Handles case where controller initializing during wait (proper async pattern)
- **Timeout fallback:** Handles case where both fail (graceful degradation, prevents infinite hang)

**Performance impact:**
Minimal. `Promise.race()` is fast, and synchronous path returns immediately in common case (after first interaction).

**Testing implications:**
System tests may not catch this because test timing is different from real browser:
```ruby
# Tests pass but feature breaks in production
test "drawer opens on click" do
  click_button "Open Drawer"
  assert_selector "[data-state='open']" # Passes (test timing lucky)
end
```

Add explicit initialization verification:
```ruby
test "drawer opens on first click without wait" do
  visit page_path
  # Immediately click (no wait)
  click_button "Open Drawer"
  assert_selector "[data-state='open']", wait: 1
end
```

**Architecture smell:**
If you have many async controller dependencies, consider:
- Fewer controllers (consolidate responsibility)
- Outlets instead of events (Stimulus built-in communication)
- Server-driven state (let Turbo Streams handle updates)
